the activities tobe integrated are both candidates for outsourcing, andthe activities could be integrated within a single sup-plier. There are two basic motives for integrating twoactivities into the same organizational entity, evenwhen these activities are external to the manufacturer. Difﬁculty Measuring the Quality of Output of a Precedent Activity. There is a strong motive to inte- grate two interrelated activities A and B into the sameorganizational entity when the output of Activity A isrequired for completion of the Activity B, and whenthe quality of the output of Activity A is difﬁcult toassess. Such situations present classic agency prob-lems in that the organization responsible for the ﬁrstactivity could shirk without detection (Alchian andDemsetz 1972; Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991). By in-tegrating the two activities into the same organiza-tional entity, responsibility for the pair of activitiesresides with the same agent. Task Uncertainty Due to Endogenous Factors. Some pairs of design and production activities are highly interdependent. In product design, situationsarise in which completion of one activity requiresinformation from the other activity, and the structureof the information exchange cannot be anticipated inadvance. Such pairs of activities are said to be coupled and generally require an iterative exchange of infor-mation and cooperative resolution of decision param-eters in order to achieve a good joint solution (Thomp-son 1967; Krishnan, Eppinger, and Whitney 1997; Loch and Terwiesch 1998). In these situations, it is difﬁcultto contract for the completion of a single activity, andmuch simpler to contract for the completion of the pairof activities. Explicit codiﬁcation of design rules allows compo- nent production and component design activities to bedisintegrated. Design rules are an instance of the useof standards as a coordination mechanism (Galbraith1974; Baldwin and Clark 1999). The interdependencyof component design and component production isthe focus of substantial work on design for manufactur- ingorDFM (Ulrich and Eppinger 2004). When the component production process is stable and well un-derstood, then it is often possible to establish designrules that express the constraints of the productionprocess (Adler 1995). Designers can then specify thegeometry and material properties of the component ina way that it can be made without complication on theintended production process. Such design rules existformally for integrated circuits and printed circuitboards, and exist less formally for many metal form-ing and plastics processing processes. However, whenthe process is new, unusual, and/or poorly under-stood, there are generally no design rules. Feasible designs are established through trial and error orthrough dialogue between production process expertsand component designers. For example, the produc-tion processes for many composite materials (e.g.,graphite-ﬁber-reinforced polymers) are poorly under-stood and/or highly complex. As a result, componentdesign of composite materials must often be con-ducted iteratively with the trial and reﬁnement of theproduction process, or at a minimum with strongcommunication between process experts and compo-nent designers (Fine and Whitney 1996). Monteverde(1995) calls this kind of interaction between designersand production personnel “unstructured technical di-alog,” and ﬁnds empirical evidence in the semicon-ductor industry that its presence is a signiﬁcant mo-tive for integration of design and production. 3. Implications for Organizational Structure In Section 2, we argued that there is a set of motives for internalizing or outsourcing design and produc-tion activities, and that there is a set of motives forintegrating pairs of design and production activities.These motives, when taken together, comprise a col-lection of inﬂuences on the organization of design andproduction, and a rational organizational structurereﬂects a resolution of the entire set of inﬂuences.Here, we attempt to consolidate the various factorsinto a framework for making and/or explaining orga-nizational design decisions.Ulrich and Ellison: Beyond Make-Buy: Internalization and Integration of Design and Production Production and Operations Management 14(3), pp. 315–330, © 2005 Production and Operations Management Society 319The organizational problem we address is how to assign the activities in a value network to one or moreorganizational entities. For simplicity, consider twoactivities, A and B, which might be thought of ascomponent design and component production, andassume the perspective of a manufacturer with a sin-gle potential supplier. There are four distinct organi-zational schemes in this situation, illustrated in Fig-ure 2. In case 1, assume that there are motives to internal- ize activity A, internalize activity B, and to integrateactivities A and B. In this case, a straightforward re-sponse to these motives is the internalization of both Aand B. This organizational scheme both internalizesand integrates the two activities. In case 2, assume that there are motives to internal- ize A and motives to outsource B. There are no mo-tives to integrate A and B. In this case, a harmoniousorganizational scheme is one in which A is internal-ized and B is outsourced to a supplier.In case 3, assume that there are motives for integrat- ing activities A and B and no motives to internalizeeither activity. In this case, an organizational schemeconsistent with these motives assigns both A and B toa single supplier. In case 4, assume that there are motives to internal- ize activity A, to outsource activity B, and to integrateA and B. In this case, there is no organizational schemethat will cleanly respond to these conﬂicting motives.Either A and B are assigned to a single supplier, A andB are internalized, or A is internalized and B out-sourced. Any of these three organizational schemes isa compromise. This framework highlights situations in which or- ganizational structures are likely to function harmoni-ously and situations in which conﬂicting motives arelikely to present managerial challenges. Given the re-ality of conﬂicting organizational motives, there aremechanisms for addressing the potential weaknessesin an organizational solution. After describing our Figure 2 Four possible cases reﬂecting different motives for internalization and integration and different organizational schemes. Ulrich and Ellison: Beyond Make-Buy: Internalization and Integration of Design and Production 320 Production and Operations Management 14(3), pp. 315–330, © 2005 Production and Operations Management Societyempirical exploration, we revisit this issue using ex- amples from the mountain bicycle industry to illus-trate ways to handle these potential weaknesses. 4. Empirical Exploration We empirically explore the concepts developed in theprevious sections by studying design and productionsourcing decisions in the u.s.mountain bicycle indus- try. Our goal is to examine the extent to which thetheoretical framework of internalization and integra-tion explains the organization of design and produc-tion in different ﬁrms in the industry. The United States bicycle market constitutes ap- proximately 10 percent of the 100 to 130 million unitworld bicycle market. Approximately 75 percent of allbicycles in the u.s. are sold through the mass-mer- chandising channel. Bicycles sold through this channelare typically children’s bicycles and adult bicyclespriced below $200. The remaining 25 percent of u.s. bicycle sales occur through independent bicycle deal-ers (IBDs). Ninety-ﬁve percent of all bicycles pricedabove $200 are sold through IBDs. We focus on this“over $200” portion of the market because this pricecategory and channel of distribution deﬁne a rela-tively independent set of competitors exhibiting a great deal of organizational diversity. As of 1997, therewere approximately 6,000 IBDs in the u.s. with 1,500 dealers accounting for 60 percent of all unit sales.Total unit sales have been fairly constant over the pastdecade, but the proportion of “mountain bikes” hasincreased from 12 percent in 1985 to over 50 percenttoday. We focus on the industry in 1997, a time in the industry lifecycle in which mountain bike frame tech-nology was in ﬂux and in which there was substantialvariance in organizational choices. Over 75 ﬁrms com-peted in the over-$200 category, allowing for substan-tial natural variation in strategies. (See Ulrich et al.1999 for a more general discussion of competitivestrategies in the bicycle industry.) A mountain bicycle is generally thought of as con- sisting of a frame plus components (Figure 3). Theframe is generally a tubular structure and the compo-nents (e.g., brakes, seat, crank set, wheels, derailleurs)are mounted to the frame. Our empirical analysis fo-cuses on the frame, because we believe that the frameis the component around which there is the mostvariation in industrial practice, and around which theorganizational problems are most challenging. Nearlyevery mountain bike manufacturer purchases severalmajor power train components and/or braking com-ponents from a few large suppliers. Other compo-nents, such as tires, rims, spokes, seats, and handle-bars are obtained from a variety of smaller suppliers.Most of the components attached to a bicycle frameare selected . That is, they are standard components available from the catalog of a supplier. The onlycomponent that is consistently uniquely designed foreach new version of a product is the frame. The frameis also the component that is most closely identiﬁedwith the bicycle brand and is generally the ﬁrst ele-ment of the product considered when a customermakes a buying decision. 4.1. Application of Theory We consider the design and production activities forthe bicycle frame. In 1997, there was a very healthyframe supply base in the u.s.and Asia, and manufac- turers had the luxury of several alternatives for de-signing and producing frames. In theory, there arefour basic options available to the manufacturer. Themanufacturer can choose to do frame design internallyor externally and can choose to do frame productioninternally or externally. When frame design and frameproduction are done either both internally or by thesame supplier externally, then these activities are in-tegrated. Internalizing/Outsourcing Frame Design. The mo- tives for internalizing design can be quite prominentin the case of bicycle frames. For some ﬁrms, designdistinctiveness is the primary basis of their competi-tive strategies, and so these ﬁrms are likely to inter-nalize frame design. This is consistent with both theTCE view of integration and with the capabilities viewof integration. From a TCE perspective, knowledgeand skill related to a proprietary product design arehighly speciﬁc assets. Allowing a supplier to harborthese assets presents high risks of hold-up and oppor-tunistic behavior. From a capabilities perspective, ifthe basis of competition is the distinctiveness of thebicycle frame, then the ﬁrm will wish to cultivate thiscapability for itself. In mountain bike design, the mostactive area of proprietary frame design is the suspen-sion. Nearly all manufacturers offer “hard tails,” bicy-cles with no rear suspension. Some of these manufac- Figure 3 A basic mountain bicycle with no rear suspension (a “hard tail”) and conventional frame material. (Courtesy of Cannon-dale.) Ulrich and Ellison: Beyond Make-Buy: Internalization and Integration of Design and Production Production and Operations Management 14(3), pp. 315–330, © 2005 Production and Operations Management Society 321turers offer bikes with rear suspension, and rear suspension conﬁguration is a primary differentiatingattribute of many bicycle brands. See Figure 4 for anexample of a unique full suspension design. Wewould therefore expect that ﬁrms that offer full sus-pension frames and that compete based on the unique-ness of their suspension designs would beneﬁt frominternalizing the frame design activity. Other ﬁrms,who presumably compete on some other basis (e.g.,distribution, value, service, etc.) would not beneﬁtsubstantially from such internalization. In Section 2, we identiﬁed several motives for out- sourcing an activity: beneﬁts of competition amongsuppliers, external scale economies, smoothing of de-mand volatility, access to capabilities, and minimizingﬁnancial investment. These factors do not appear to bedominant in the design sourcing decision for bicycleframes. The beneﬁts of competition are always presentwhenever there are many suppliers and this beneﬁt isessentially the backdrop against which the other fac-tors are considered. The capital investment for theframe design activity is relatively small (e.g., $10,000for a workstation and software for an engineer). Thereis relatively little design automation. Therefore, scaleeconomies are not prominent in frame design andminimizing ﬁnancial investment is therefore also not alarge factor. Because there is strong seasonality in thebicycle industry (K2 Inc. 2003), the variability in de-mand for frame design is highly correlated acrossﬁrms. This means that there are no beneﬁts to out-sourcing frame design in terms of smoothing variabil-ity in demand. Access to capabilities could be a factorin deciding to outsource frame design for a new ﬁrm.However, the ﬁrms in our study have all been oper-ating at least ﬁve years, which is ample time to de-velop a frame design capability, if desired. Integrating these factors, we can formulate the following hypothesis. Hypothesis 1.Firms that offer unique suspension de - signs internalize the design activity ,ceteris paribus .Internalizing/Outsourcing Frame Production. The dominant factor associated with internalﬁzing/out-sourcing frame production is economies of scale.Economies of scale are, of course, driven by unit vol-ume, but also by the number of different basic mate-rials used in frame processing. The number of mate-rials in use is important because each differentmaterial requires a substantially different productionprocess. Aluminum requires heat treating. Titaniumrequires special tube cutting tools. Graphite-ﬁber-re-inforced polymer (GFRP) requires molds, special ad-hesives, and curing ovens. As a result, for the sameunit volume, ﬁrms that offer only one material achievemore signiﬁcant economies of scale than do ﬁrmsoffering several materials. Therefore, we would expectﬁrms that do not have the minimum efﬁcient scale inany one material to beneﬁt from outsourcing produc-tion of at least the frames made from that material. The competitive strategies of a few manufacturers revolve around expertise processing a particular ma-terial. This is true, for example, of Merlin 5(titanium) and Kestrel (GFRP). These ﬁrms offer one and onlyone material and were pioneers in developing theproduction processes for these materials in the contextof bicycle frames. For such ﬁrms, we would expectframe production to be internalized. Note that thecompetitive strategies of these ﬁrms are sustainableonly as long as processing of these materials is notwidely available from independent suppliers offeringproduction capabilities to any manufacturer. The remaining generic factors associated with inter- nalization or outsourcing are present to some extent, butdo not appear to be prominent in frame production.Because of seasonality, most ﬁrms choose to hold ﬁnishedgoods inventory, and so there are few potential beneﬁtsfrom the smoothing of the stochastic component of de-mand that could result from outsourcing production. Someﬁrms may have a transient need to acquire a particularproduction capability (e.g., titanium fabrication), but thematerials options were stable from 1993 to 1997, so thatﬁrms desiring internal frame production capability couldhave acquired it. There are few speciﬁc assets in frameproduction. There are four basic material processing alter-natives and these processes are widely applicable in theindustry. There is some product-speciﬁc tooling, but a com-mon practice is for manufacturers to own the speciﬁc tool-ing used by suppliers in order to mitigate asset speciﬁcityproblems (Monteverde and Teece 1982b). Two additionalhypotheses arise from these factors. Hypothesis 2.Firms that compete on the basis of unique materials processing capabilities internalize produc - tion,ceteris paribus . 5These ﬁrms are not in our data set, and so we use their real names.Figure 4 Example of a full suspension mountain bicycle with a unique suspension design. (Courtesy of Cannondale.) Ulrich and Ellison: Beyond Make-Buy: Internalization and Integration of Design and Production 322 Production and Operations Management 14(3), pp. 315–330, © 2005 Production and Operations Management SocietyHypothesis 3.Firms that lack scale and that do not compete on the basis of unique materials processing capa - bilities outsource production ,ceteris paribus . Integration of Design and Production. We argued in Section 2 that the primary motive for integratingcomponent design and component production is alack of design rules for the production process. Theemergence of design rules generally occurs as produc-tion processes mature. In frame production, the ma-turity of the production process is closely related tothe length of time a frame material has been in wide-spread use. Currently, there are three relatively newmaterials in bicycle frames: titanium, graphite-ﬁber-reinforced polymers (GFRP), and metal-matrix com-posites. A bicycle with a frame made from GFRP isshown in Figure 5. Of course “newness” is a transientproperty of a material. In 1980, aluminum would havebeen considered a new material, but in 1997, it wasextremely common and the aluminum frame produc-tion process was well understood. When a materialand its associated fabrication process are new, design-ers must collaborate closely with those operating theproduction process to arrive at a design that bothfunctions as desired and can be feasibly and econom-ically produced. Therefore, we would predict thatframes employing new materials would beneﬁt frombeing both designed and produced by the same orga-nizational entity. This factor gives rise to a ﬁnal hy-pothesis. Hypothesis 4.Firms that employ new frame materials either internalize both frame design and frame productionor outsource these activities to the same supplier ,ceteris paribus . 4.2. Sample and Data Collection Using Bicycling Magazine ’s annual buyer’s guide, and market share information from a Bicycling readers’ survey, we identiﬁed the 25 largest mountain bicyclecompanies operating in the United States. Represen-tatives from these companies were contacted by tele- phone and asked to ﬁll out a written questionnaire. Ofthese, 17 actually completed the survey. Two compa-nies refused to participate and the others did notrespond after agreeing to participate. Coincidentally,there happens to be a great deal of public informationavailable for the two companies who refused to par-ticipate, and so we were able to determine the valuesof the study variables for these companies throughindependent sources. Therefore, the sample comprises19 of the top 25 companies in the industry, represent-ing approximately 90 percent of the unit sales of over$200 mountain bicycles in the United States. The ques-tionnaire was six pages long and contained 53 detailedquestions about the company’s design, marketing, andoperations practices. The survey was pre-tested withﬁve companies and revised based on the comments ofthe respondents. A copy of the survey is availablefrom the authors upon request. We focused on the design and production sourcing decisions for frames associated with the highest-priced models in each of the ﬁrm’s product categories(e.g., aluminum “hard tail”, titanium full suspension,aluminum downhill, etc.). We focused on the high-endmodels because these models exhibit the most vari-ance in sourcing decisions and because it was infeasi-ble to consider every frame sold by every manufac-turer. In most cases, our unit of analysis is the ﬁrm. In theory, it would make sense to use the individualframe as the unit of analysis, and we did collect frame-level data. However, with three exceptions in oursample, ﬁrms make consistent decisions across all thehigh-end bikes in their product lines. Therefore, wefeel it is more appropriate to consider the ﬁrm as theunit of analysis. For the three exceptions, we create aseparate observation for each different type of sourc-ing decision made by the ﬁrm. The study variables are as follows:D, Design (0,1). Dis 1 if the frame design activity is performed internally and 0 if it is performed by asupplier. We deﬁned frame design as the activity inwhich computer models or drawings are created. P, Production (0,1). Pis 1 if the frame production activity is performed internally and 0 if it is performedby a supplier. No manufacturer