Function sharing in mechanical design Karl T. Ulrich and Warren P. Seering Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA Function sharing is the simultaneous implementation of several functions by a single structural element. This article describes how the idea of function sharing can be used in a computational design procedure that produces efficient designs flora modular designs. These ideas have been implemented as a computer program for the domain of mechanical devices that can be described functionally as a network of lumped-parameter idealized elements. Keywords: mechanical design, design theory, design automation Function sharing in mechanical design is the simul- taneous implementation in an artefact of several func- tions by a single structural element. Consider, for exam- ple, the difference between the devices shown in Figure 1. Although the two are functionally similar, the upper device is much more efficient because each structural element implements several functions. This article de- scribes how function sharing can be achieved by a computational design procedure in order to produce efficient designs from modular designs. The concept of function sharing In synthesizing a design, engineers represent an artefact in terms of its constituent functional elements, its schematic description. Designers must also represent an artefact in terms of its constituent structural elements, its physical description. In the case of computational design systems, these representations will often be explicit and distinct, while in human design systems the representa- A short version of this paper appeared in the proceedings of the Seventh National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, held in August 1988 at St Paul, MN, USA. tions are often informal and interleaved. For a given physical and schematic description of a device, there will be a correspondence between dements in each. Function sharing is a mapping from more than one dement in a schematic description to a single element in a physical description. In the case of the devices shown in Figure 1, some of the functional elements in an imagined schematic language might be cutter, actuator, finger interface, bearing and key ring interface. The structural elements in a physical language might be the geometrical descriptions and material properties of each separate part. Function sharing is important Function sharing is important for three reasons. First, designs that exhibit function sharing are in most respects better designs than the non-function-sharing counter- part. Second, a design simplification procedure that results in function sharing allows the designer to think in a modular, decomposed fashion, with the option of subsequently processing a design to make it more effi- cient. Third, function sharing is often viewed as one of the sources of novelty or interest in mechanical design; so Vol 11 No 4 October 1990 0142-694X/90/04223--12 © 1990 Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd 223 t Figure 1. Example of function sharing I an understanding of function sharing is in part an understanding of novelty. If automobiles were designed without function sharing they would be relatively large, heavy, expensive and unreliable. But because elements like the sheet-metal body perform many functions (electrical ground, structu- ral support, aerodynamic faring, weather protection and aesthetics, among others) automobiles can be manufac- tured relatively inexpensively and can perform relatively well. In fact, most mass-produced devices exhibit func- tion sharing. The leads on integrated circuit packages are electrical conductors, thermal conductors and attach- ment points for the circuit board. The physical structure of a styrofoam coffee cup holds liquid, insulates, pro- vides a graspable surface and rests stably on a table. As a general rule, mass-produced designs that exhibit func- tion sharing are better than those that do not exhibit function sharing. Function sharing contributes to design quality in two major ways. First, designs exhibiting function sharing will generally be less expensive to produce than designs that do not exhibit function shar- ing, as a result of fewer parts, easier assembly and less required adjustment and maintenance. Second, designs that share function generally perform better than those that do not, resulting from decreased size and weight. On the other hand, function sharing is generally a poor design strategy for research devices and prototypes where debugging, adjustment and diagnosis are very important, because function sharing often causes device perform- ance parameters to be coupled in complicated ways to device physical parameters. While function sharing may be an important design strategy for a ballpoint pen or an electric drill, it is a potentially disadvantageous strategy for a steel rolling mill or a laboratory instrument. For the purposes of this article, we assume that a computer system able to generate design descriptions that exhibit function sharing is a valuable tool. Most designs evolve from being modular to being integrated. This is partly because it is easier to think about new problems if they are decomposed in a modular fashion, and parry because in the initial stages of product development engineers want to be able to work indepen- dently on different aspects of a design. The function sharing procedure described in this article is one way of transforming modular designs into integrated designs. In tandem with a procedure for generating the initial modu- lar descriptions of designs 1, the procedure allows a design system to transform a behavioural specification into an efficient physical description. We are interested in innovative design. Function sharing is part of the perception of novelty, simplicity or interest in a device. To the extent that function sharing can be understood, one of the components of novel mechanical design can be understood. Why function sharing is possible Of the infinite physical properties of a structural ele- ment, only a small set are relevant to the behaviour the designer intends for that element. In addition to the primary properties of a structural element that provide that element's intended function, there are many secon- dary properties that are incidental to those that imple- ment the intended function. The key idea that allows function sharing to be achieved by a design procedure is that these secondary properties of structural elements can be exploited. By recognizing and exploiting secondary properties of one element, neighbouring elements can be eliminated from the design. For example, a modular design of an automobile would include a ground wire running from the tail light to the battery. By recognizing that there is already an element (the steel automobile body) that travels from the tail light to the battery, and that this element has the secondary property that it conducts electricity, the ground wire can be eliminated. In this example, this simplification is possible because steel has many prop- erties other than high stiffness, high strength, ductility and low cost (ostensibly the reasons for using steel for car bodies). Performing this reasoning requires a physical representation of the design, and an ability to-~ secondary properties of regions of the physical descrip- tion. Summary of function sharing procedure The procedure for achieving function sharing consists of three steps: 224 DESIGN STUDIES (1) a structural element is deleted from the physical description (2) alternative features in the physical description that can potentially implement the function of the deleted element are identified (3) the identified features are modified to accentuate their desirable secondary properties This procedure is illustrated in Figure 2. The initial design is a lamp fixture hung by a piece of link chain, through which the electrical cord is woven. In order to simplify the lamp design, an element (the chain) is deleted from the design. Next, the tensile properties of the electrical cord are recognized. Finally, these prop- erties are exploited by making the cord thicker. Through this three-step process the design is simplified. DOMAIN DESCRIPTION AND REPRESENTATION Dynamic systems As a domain for exploring function sharing, we have chosen mechanical devices whose primary behaviour can be described by a differential equation relating an input and output quantity and whose schematic description can be expressed as a network of lumped-parameter idealized elements. The computer program that implements the Figure 2. Illustration of function sharing procedure function sharing procedure is further limited to devices that can be described with fluid-mechanical elements and mechanical-translational elements. Such devices include pressure gauges, accelerometers, force transducers and pneumatic cylinders. We call this domain dynamic sys- tems. Examples of diverse designs that are not in this class are conveyer systems, ball bearings and computer dis- plays (although these systems can be described with differential equations and networks, such descriptions do not characterize their primary behaviour). We have chosen the dynamic systems domain because there is a well-developed schematic language for the domain, and because many of the geometrical issues can be under- stood in two dimensions. Physical representation We have chosen a two-and-one-half dimensional geometry to describe devices physically. In this representation, physical descriptions of designs consist of a collection of structural elements (these can be thought of as design components like piston-cylinders or springs), which are in turn built from orthogonally connected rectangular- prismatic sections of material (these rectangular- prismatic sections are the primitive physical building blocks of the system). Figure 3 shows the physical description of a piston-cylinder structural element. Fi- gure 4 shows the top view of the physical description of a rate-of-pressure indicator containing the piston-cylinder structural element. The two-and-one-half dimensional representation is required rather than a two-dimensional representation to allow fluid to flow past obstacles in the design. For example, if the piston-cylinder in Figure 3 were only two-dimensional, the two cavities above and below the piston rod would not be in fluid communication and the piston would not function as expected. By adding an additional half dimension (thickness) to the design de- scription, the upper and lower cavities can be connected as long as the piston rod is only half as thick as the cylinder. In this two-and-one-half dimensional geometry, Newtonian physics applies as if the device were fully three-dimensional if one imagines the device to be sand- Top I Front Right side Figure 3. A piston-cylinder represented as a collection of orthogonally configured rectangular-prismatic sections Vol 11 No 4 October 1990 225 Piston - cylinder I . l Connector Connector Figure 4. Example of a physical description of a design wiched between two infinitely stiff and strong, friction- less plates. This particular physical representation was chosen to simplify the computatibnal geometry problems while still maintaining the applicability of Newtonian physics. In addition to specifying the x and y locations and dimensions of each rectangular-prismatic section of the design, a limited set of material properties are also specified. The material of each section is specified to be either stiff or flexible, and of high or low density. Each section is also specified as either attached to or free from the imaginary plates that sandwich the design. Designs consisting of fluid-mechanical elements also include a working fluid specification (either gas or liquid). All design descriptions contain a specifcafion of an external environment for the design (also either gas or liquid). Nominal functional specification In the dynamic systems domain, the schematic descrip- tion of a device can be expressed as a network of idealized lumped-parameter functional elements. The schematic description can be thought of as a generalized circuit diagram, so the hehaviour of the entire device can be derived from the behaviour of the individual idealized elements and the network laws. In addition to specifying the stricdy physical properties of a design, the function sharing procedure requires a specification of the intended function of each structural element. This specification is an explicit linking of functional elements from the schematic description to regions of the physical design description. A function specification includes the name of the function and one or two reference points in the design. For example, the specification of a fluid resist- ance would indicate first, that the function is fluid resistance; second, that the resistance is located between two points identified with x-y coordinates. The nominal functions of all structural elements in a physical descrip- tion are specified similarly. In addition to the lumped-parameter functions, two special functional elements are also necessary: connection and ground. These are used to specify how regions of the physical description connect the other functional ele- ments together. FUNCTION SHARING PROCEDURE The input to the function sharing procedure is a physical description of a device augmented with a specification of the intended function of each structural element; the output is also a physical description. The objective of the procedure is to simplify the initial physical description in order to reduce the number of structural elements. The function sharing procedure consists of three steps: (1) a structural element is deleted from the design; (2) geometrical features that can potentially implement the function of the deleted element are found; (3) modifica- tions are made to the design to exploit the secondary properties of the features found in step 2. After illustrat- ing these steps with an example, we explain each step for the dynamic systems domain. Example of function sharing procedure Figures 5 and 6 display an example of the function sharing procedure in the dynamic systems domain. The x(t) ii 1 111~'1~ 11 Figure 5. I Hb Eliminating the tluid resistance 226 DESIGN STUDIES AB | x(t) I U x(t) Figure 6. Eliminating the fluid capacitance figures illustrate the simplification of a rate-of-pressure indicator. The device consists of a piston-cylinder, a fluid resistance and a fluid capacitance. The output of the piston cylinder is attached to a spring (labelled X(t)). The input of the device is attached to a pressure source (labelled P(t). As P(t) changes, a pressure drop is created across the fluid resistance. This pressure drop causes the piston to move, deflecting the spring. As P(t) stops changing, the pressure across the fluid resistance goes to zero and the piston returns to its neutral position. Each description in the figures corresponds to a diffe- rent state during the simplification. First, the fluid resistance is deleted from the design. Next, a potentially resistive feature is found with respect to points A and B. In this case the feature is a path between A and B passing between adjacent edges. This feature is modified to create a clearance between the adjacent edges, such that resistance is established between A and B. In this step the structural element implementing fluid resistance has been eliminated by creating a leakage path past the piston. Second, the fluid capacitance is deleted from the design and a feature that can provide fluid capacitance is found with respect to point A. In this case, it is simply a cavity adjacent to point A. Finally this feature is mod- ified by extending the cylinder length, thereby providing the capacitance of the deleted element. In this step, the fluid capacitance is eliminated by exploiting the fact that the cylinder already has some capacitance. Deleting a structural element A physical description of a design is represented as a collection of structural elements. The first step in the function sharing procedure is to remove one of these structural elements. Removal of a structural element from a design may cause some side effects. For example, removing a fluid element from a design may cause leakage. Removing a mechanical-translational element may cause parts of the design to become disconnected. Because of these side effects, the design must also be repaired after the deletion step. In the case of deleted fluid elements, repairs consist of changing the connectors to which the element was attached, or inserting a plug in cases where the element is not attached to connectors. In the case of deleted translational elements, the repairs consist of reattaching detached regions of the device. In addition to removing the element and repairing the design, the deletion step must establish reference points in the design with respect to which alternative features should be found. We omit the details of the procedures for making repairs and establishing new reference points (they are given in Reference 1). Recognizing alternative features After deleting the structural element, the next step is to fred alternative features in the physical description that can potentially implement the function of the element. For clarity we assume that the deleted element has only one intended function (the multi-function case is treated in Reference 1). We have approached the feature finding task as a physical property recognition problem the identifica- tion of one of a set of known configurations of structural primitives that can be modified such that they approxi- mate the relevant function. For example, fluid resistance can be derived from a narrow passage between two edges, a long narrow channel through a solid region, or an orifice in a plate. For each of these ways of implementing resistance there is a physical feature that could be potentially modified to achieve the resistive function. For example, a path between two reference points that passes between two adjacent but detached edges could be resistive if a clearance were established between the edges. A path between two reference points that is obstructed by a solid wall could be resistive if a hole were punched in the wall. These relations constitute the function sharing knowledge base. The relations for fluid resistance are shown in Figure 7. The relations for the other functions in the domain are similar. The procedures for recognizing any particular physical feature are ad hoc and specific to our two-and-one-half dimensional geometrical representation. For example, finding a path between two points obstructed by a wall involves first finding all internal walls in the design, and then performing a search along section faces from each reference point to each side of the internal wall. For the most part these procedures are straightforward, if some- what tedious, computational geometry problems. Modifying alternative features Once the potentially useful features are found, the final Vol 11 No 4 October 1990 227 Resistance ] Path with I adjacent edges I clearance Path through solid material I Cut channel Path with obstructing wall I Punch hole Function Feature Modification Figure 7. Organization of function sharing recognition and modification procedures step is to execute the modification operators associated with each feature. In the case of the fluid resistance, for example, if the feature found by the recognition